Require function names to be registered (#467)
ietf-wg-jsonpath/draft-ietf-jsonpath-base: draft-ietf-jsonpath-base.md

within the range of exact values defined in I-JSON {{-i-json}}, namely
within the interval \[-(2<sup>53</sup>)+1, (2<sup>53</sup>)-1].

> 2. Uses of function extensions must be *supported* and *well typed*,

Reviewer: This section is about validity of a query.  Validity is independent of what you have implemented.  A query may be

* valid
* not valid
* of unknown validity (e.g., because you don't know a registration that might have occurred).

Reviewer: Whether you actually support a valid query is a separate question.  (You can't really "support" invalid or unknown-valid-or-not queries.)

Reviewer: So let me make this point clearer: This section is about queries and when they are valid.  It is now about implementations.

Author: Thanks for this important point. Another reason to abandon the PR.

                      function-expr
~~~

Any function expressions in a query must be well formed (by conforming to the above ABNF),
supported, and well typed,
otherwise the JSONPath implementation MUST raise an error
(see {{synsem-overview}}).

> For a function expression to be supported, each function extension involved in the expression
> must be supported.

Reviewer 2: This still feels weird to me.  We have

- function expression
- function extension
- expression

```suggestion
For a filter expression to be supported, each function extension involved in the expression
must be supported.
```

I think this is what we mean.  We call the entire expression a "filter expression."  We don't define a "function expression" anywhere that I'm aware (although the function syntax itself is `function-expr` which may be a misnomer).

Author: `function-expr` is defined in the ABNF as you observe (and includes expressions involving nested function calls). That ABNF section is immediately followed by "Any function expressions in a query [...]". §2.4.1 is entitled "Type System for Function Expressions" and §2.4.3 "Well-typedness of Function Expressions". So I think the term is well defined and can and should be used here in preference to "filter expression".

Reviewer 2: What you have is weird and feels redundant and a bit confusing.

Author: I don't follow. This sentence defines function expression support (required for validity by the previous paragraph) with function extension support. Why is this redundant? What's confusing about it?

Reviewer: Again, support is not a function of the query, so we cannot make this statement.

> MUST be registered (see {{iana-fnex}}).

Reviewer 2: (@glyn apparently I had left this as a review comment, then didn't submit the review.  My concern still applies to the current text.)

> MUST be registered (see {{iana-fnex}}).

Author: > A function can be in the registry and still be unsupported by an implementation. This seems to say that the sole requirement for support is its registration. But that's not the case: _implementation_ support is also required.

What I meant was that a function extension being supported implies the function name is registered. (But there may be multiple functions in a function expression.) Needs rewording.

> 
> Secondly, I think we're conflating "function expression" and "function name." Each function expression should only have a single name, but the way this is worded seems to imply that a function expression can have multiple names.

Take the function expression `foo(bar())`. There are two function names in the expression.

> MUST be registered (see {{iana-fnex}}).

Author: I've adjusted the wording.

> Implementations MUST support the function extensions defined
> in this document, but are free to support or not support other registered function extensions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Implementations MUST support the function extensions defined
in this document, and SHOULD support other registered function extensions.
```

I think this gives a little more pressure to implement other registered functions but still an escape if they don't.

Author: I was trying to avoid being prescriptive, but I'd be comfortable with a statement like the above saying "[...] and SHOULD support all other registered function extensions".

Author: I've added the SHOULD requirement.

Reviewer: I don't think we should say this, as there probably will be registrations for very platform- or application-specific functions.

Some IETF registries have a "recommended" column, which is kind of the inverse: if it is not recommended, you need a good reason to implement it at all.

I think at some point we'll roll up a set of registered functions and say that there is an expectation these will be available, kind of a JSONPath 1.1.  But remember that the largest pressure for extensions is in the projection/transformation space, and we don't even have an extension point for this.

Author: Ok, reverted the SHOULD change. At least I'm not now in a minority of one.

Reviewer 2: > there probably will be registrations for very platform- or application-specific functions.

God, I hope not.  The registry should be a list of functions that should and _can_ be globally supported.  Platform- and application-specific function are by definition _not_ interoperable.

                      function-expr
~~~

Any function expressions in a query must be well formed (by conforming to the above ABNF),
supported, and well typed,
otherwise the JSONPath implementation MUST raise an error
(see {{synsem-overview}}).

For a function expression to be supported, each function extension involved in the expression
must be supported.
Implementations MUST support the function extensions defined
in this document, but are free to support or not support other registered function extensions.

> Implementations MUST NOT support function extensions that are not registered.

Reviewer: This is not a very realistic requirement.
In particular during the time from developing a function extension to stabilizing it and making the specification widely available.

Author: My thinking was that during that period of time, the implementation would no longer conform to the spec. But it then becomes tricky to talk about that situation in the spec, as the back-and-forth between Greg and I has shown.

So perhaps this PR should be abandoned and I/we have to accept that there will be a free for all of custom function extensions, some of which may be registered and others of which will never get that far.

To define which function expressions are well typed,
a type system is first introduced.

### Type System for Function Expressions {#typesys}

Each parameter as well as the result of a function extension must have a declared type.

> The registered set of function extensions (see {{iana-fnex}}) is the source of knowledge

Reviewer: This is maybe the place where we concede that an implementation may support further function extensions, which then are obviously not interoperable (and their use makes the queries using them non-interoperable).

                      function-expr
~~~

Any function expressions in a query must be well formed (by conforming to the above ABNF),
supported, and well typed,
otherwise the JSONPath implementation MUST raise an error
(see {{synsem-overview}}).

For a function expression to be supported, each function extension involved in the expression
must be supported.
Implementations MUST support the function extensions defined
in this document, but are free to support or not support other registered function extensions.

Implementations MUST NOT support function extensions that are not registered.

> Note: an implementation may behave by default in a "strict" mode that conforms to this specification
> and offer some way of behaving in a "non-strict" mode that supports unregistered function extensions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: an implementation MAY offer some way of switching between a "strict" mode that conforms to this specification, which must be the default,
and  a "non-strict" mode that supports unregistered function extensions.
```

Maybe?

Author: That's reasonable except using "MAY" in non-normative text feels a little over the top and "which must be the default" also seems slightly too prescriptive. How about this instead?
```suggestion
Note: an implementation may offer a default "strict" mode that conforms to this specification
and a "non-strict" mode that supports unregistered function extensions.
```

Author: I don't want to waste any more time discussing the unspec'd behaviour of implementations, such as what that should be like and whether it should appear in normative text, so I deleted the note.

                      function-expr
~~~

Any function expressions in a query must be well formed (by conforming to the above ABNF),
supported, and well typed,
otherwise the JSONPath implementation MUST raise an error
(see {{synsem-overview}}).

For a function expression to be supported, each function extension involved in the expression
must be supported.
Implementations MUST support the function extensions defined
in this document, but are free to support or not support other registered function extensions.

Implementations MUST NOT support function extensions that are not registered.
Note: if an implementation supports a function extension that is not registered,
the implementation will not conform to this specification until the function extension is

> registered.

Reviewer 2: I think this is unnecessary.  It also implies that any custom functions will be proposed for registration, which is unlikely.  Mostly, I expect users will extend an implementation with some custom function for their use only and be satisfied with that without considering registration.

Author: Does this help?
```suggestion
Note: if an implementation supports a function extension that is not registered,
the implementation will not conform to this specification unless or until the function extension is
registered.
```

Reviewer 2: I think the whole note is unnecessary.  I think it's generally implied that custom functionality outside of the scope of a spec.

Author: Ok, I deleted that note.

To support a new function extension in an implementation, it is recommended that
the implementation behaves by default in a "strict" mode that conforms to this specification and

> provides some way of behaving in a "non-strict" mode that supports the new function extension.

Reviewer 2: How about:

> Custom functions MUST be supported only by a configuration option. Support of such functions MUST NOT be the default behavior.

Author: I'm trying to avoid constraining non-spec behaviour such as support for unregistered functions. Perhaps it isn't clear that the non-normative "Note:" is meant to extend to the end of the paragraph?

Reviewer 2: > I'm trying to avoid constraining non-spec behaviour

But that's exactly what you're doing by saying "strict mode" and "non-strict mode."

Author: I've clarified that the strict vs non-strict stuff is a non-normative note. I think it's worth having even though it doesn't constrain non-spec behaviour at all.

This ensures that the default behaviour of the implementation does not mislead users into
thinking that the function extension is interoperable.

> To use the function extension successfully, users have to consciously choose to use non-strict mode.

Reviewer 2: This should be a note or comment.

Author: It is intended to be. Maybe I need to make that clearer.

Author: The note should be clearer now as it has been slimmed down a lot.

If the function extension is later registered, the implementation can then support the

> function extension in the default, strict mode.

Author: @cabo & @gregsdennis: I added the above paragraph to clarify the situation when an implementation supports an unregistered function extension. It may need trimming down, but perhaps not. WDYT?

> function extension in the default, strict mode.

Reviewer 2: I don't believe this is necessary.

Author: Perhaps not, but I was trying to explain the recommended route to introducing a new function extension. If we omit this sentence, then it gives the impression users will always have to use non-strict mode to use the function extension.

Author: Ok, I've deleted that sentence.

For a function expression to be well typed:

1. its function name must be registered (see {{iana-fnex}}),
2. its declared type must be well typed in the context in which it occurs, and
3. its arguments must be well typed for the declared type of the corresponding parameters.

> (1) The registered set of function extensions is the source of knowledge regarding the return and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(1) The registered set of function extensions is the source of knowledge regarding the declared return and
```

I like saying that these are declared (as opposed to actual, as in a dynamic type system).

parameter types of a function extension.

Although a function expression being treated as well typed implies its function name is registered,

> the reverse is not necessarily true. Implementations must support the function extensions defined

Reviewer: I don't know what the reverse is: registered ➔ well-typed?  Of course not.
Or is it the inverse?
Better be explicit?

Author: Fixed in e25a509952eeae5c66facd5fd98a073c844b1b20.

For a function expression to be well typed:

1. its function name MUST be registered (see {{iana-fnex}}),
2. its declared type must be well typed in the context in which it occurs, and
3. its arguments must be well typed for the declared type of the corresponding parameters.

(1) The registered set of function extensions is the source of knowledge regarding the declared return and
parameter types of a function extension.

Although a function expression being treated as well typed implies its function name is registered,
an implementation need not treat all registered functions as well typed.
Implementations MUST support the function extensions defined
in this document, but are free to support or not support other registered function extensions.

If an implementation does not support a function extension used in a query, it MUST treat the

> function extension as not well typed.

Reviewer: See my previous comment: The error message is allowed to say the function extension is not supported, so "as not well typed" is overstating it.

Author: Sorry - I've lost track of your previous comment.

The reason I say  it MUST treat the function extension as not well typed is so that it's clear that section 2.1 applies (a query that is not well typed MUST raise an error).

A helpful implementation will provide diagnostics as part of the error - in this case, an error message saying the function extension is not supported. Do we have to spell that out or can we leave that as a quality of implementation consideration?

Author: Ah, found your previous comment https://github.com/ietf-wg-jsonpath/draft-ietf-jsonpath-base/commit/e25a509952eeae5c66facd5fd98a073c844b1b20#r109974852. Let me try to iron that out.

Author: See bdf27be40ee2f5d5995dcdd6a13d7944952b3869.

For a function expression to be well typed:

1. its function name MUST be registered (see {{iana-fnex}}),
2. its declared type must be well typed in the context in which it occurs, and
3. its arguments must be well typed for the declared type of the corresponding parameters.

(1) The registered set of function extensions is the source of knowledge regarding the declared return and
parameter types of a function extension.

If a function expression is treated as well typed, the function extensions involved in the expression belong

> to the registered set.

Reviewer 2: The way this logic is stated means that well-typedness automatically implies membership in the registry.  That's not precisely the case.

I think what you're meaning is that membership in the registry is a prerequisite to being considered well-typed.

Author: > The way this logic is stated means that well-typedness automatically implies membership in the registry. That's not precisely the case.

Notice the phrase "treated as well typed". What's incorrect about the statement?

> 
> I think what you're meaning is that membership in the registry is a prerequisite to being considered well-typed.

That's certainly true, but I also had in mind the effect on the user. If a query succeeds, the user can safely assume that any function extensions in the query are registered. Perhaps I need to spell that out.

However, an implementation may treat a function expression as not well typed even if all the function extensions

> involved in the expression are registered.

Reviewer 2: Is this a roundabout way of saying that an implementation is allowed to not support a registered function?

Author: That's certainly an implication of that sentence, but there is another implication: the query must fail with an error.

Implementations MUST support the function extensions defined
in this document, but are free to support or not support other registered function extensions.

If an implementation does not support a function extension used in a query, it MUST treat

> any function expression involving the function extension as not well typed.

Reviewer 2: I still don't understand this association between registration and well-typedness.

If a function isn't recognized, then _that_ is the error.  The implementation cannot determine the well-typedness of a function it doesn't know.  It may be that the expression _is_ well-typed, but the implementation just doesn't support the function.  In this case, raising an error saying that it's not well-typed is incorrect.

Author: Section 2.1 describes the high level error processing model: if a query is not well formed (conforms to the ABNF) and valid, an error MUST be raised (before the argument is considered). Validity (of a well formed query) means fulfilling all the semantic requirements of the spec: integers are in range and uses of function extensions are well typed.

We _could_ introduce a third category of semantic requirement to cover registration, but that's not necessary and it would introduce more function extension detail into section 2.1 which I think would be a bit of a distraction at that stage in the document.

As you point out, if an implementation can't determine the result type of a function extension, it can't know that an expression involving the function extension is well typed. I am proposing that in such a situation, the implementation should presume that the expression is not well typed. (Any error message can certainly point out that the function extension isn't recognised, and I'd expect helpful implementations to do that.)

There is a parallel in distributed two phase commit which may be helpful. When the global outcome of a transaction is (permanently) in doubt, there are three policies for handling the situation. "Presumed abort" presumes the transaction failed. "Presumed commit" presumes the transaction succeeded. "Presumed nothing" makes no presumption: it essentially waits until the global outcome can be determined (or at least asserted, e.g. by a human operator). The parallel is that I am proposing that when the well typedness of a function expression is not known, we should presume it is not well typed. The policy of presuming the function expression is well typed is non-sensical. I _think_ you are suggesting that it would be better not to make a presumption, _but to fail with an error anyway_, which presumes invalidity (of a different kind).

Reviewer 2: > Any error message can certainly point out that the function extension isn't recognised, and I'd expect helpful implementations to do that.

If this is your expectation, then why require that the error is "not well-typed"?  Either the spec is going to dictate errors or it's not.

Reviewer 2: > when the well typedness of a function expression is not known, we should presume it is not well typed.

We don't have enough information.  Making this presumption is wrong, and requiring implementations to do so, is doubly wrong.

Author: > > Any error message can certainly point out that the function extension isn't recognised, and I'd expect helpful implementations to do that.
> 
> If this is your expectation, then why require that the error is "not well-typed"? Either the spec is going to dictate errors or it's not.

There is no requirement that the error is "not well-typed". The only requirement is that the query fails with an error. This is consistent with the policy in section 2.1.

Author: > > when the well typedness of a function expression is not known, we should presume it is not well typed.
> 
> We don't have enough information. Making this presumption is wrong, and requiring implementations to do so, is doubly wrong.
> 
> Implementations should error, yes. And they should do so at the parsing stage. But an unrecognized function is just that: unrecognized; and the spec has no business saying the error should suggest anything else.

This PR does not assume there will be an error message along the lines of "not well-typed". An implementation is free to produce an error message along the lines "error: function extension foo() is not supported".

Remember my fundamental reason for adopting this policy is to avoid raising too many details about function extensions to the level of section 2.1 (and perhaps elsewhere in the spec).

Reviewer: > This PR does not assume there will be an error message along the lines of "not well-typed".

I think Greg and I are reading "treat as not well-typed" as saying just that.  I think we are looking for some other way of saying that without that implication, e.g., "cannot treat as well-typed".

Author: Ah, since I may be in a minority of one, I'll try adjusting the approach.

Author: @gregsdennis and @cabo: please see the update. Section 2.1 is impacted slightly, but perhaps this is worth it to cleanly separate supportedness from well-typedness.

Reviewer: It may be worth keeping in mind that is it much easier to update an implementation with new registry information than to actually implement the functions (in particular if they rely on platform capabilities you may not have).
So implementations may be able to provide accurate information about welltypedness of a query without being able to actually execute it -- we need to keep these two separate.

Reviewer: This leads to the observation that there is an objective and a subjective view of validity.  A query may be valid objectively (in a god-view, who always has the most recent registration updates), it may also be valid subjectively (which should only be true if it is also valid objectively), or it may be of an unknown validity subjectively (cannot happen from an objective point of view).

Author: @cabo & @gregsdennis: I made another change which makes supportedness and (subjective) registration of a function extension othogonal.

Let's consider the four combinations for a function extension `foo()`:

* supported and registered - no error
* unsupported and registered - error "foo() unsupported" (see §2.4)
* supported and unregistered - error A (see below)
* unsupported and unregistered - either error "foo() unsupported" (see §2.4) or error A (see below), at the choice of the implementation

What should error A be for an unregistered function extension? Since well-typedness of the containing function expression cannot be known, we could raise an error "function expression involving foo() not necessarily well typed"). Alternatively, we could separate unregistration from well-typedness and raise an error "unregistered foo()" without saying anything about well-typedness.

If we separated unregistration from well-typeness, we could either make unregistration its own kind of invalidity (i.e. a peer of unsupported and not well typed) or we could collapse unregistration and unsupported into a single kind of invalidity (essentially saying that an implementation cannot support a function extension that is unregistered, at least not in strict/spec-compliant mode).

I didn't separate subjective and objective registration in the above. Perhaps that needs doing. Subjective registration seems more interesting to implementers while objective registration may be more interesting to users.

Any thoughts on the best way forward?

Reviewer 2: > essentially saying that an implementation cannot support a function extension that is unregistered, at least not in strict/spec-compliant mode

I think this is the correct approach.  An implementation would need to explicitly "unsupport" any custom functions when operating in strict mode.  Further, that strict mode should be the default.

Regarding subjective vs objective support, the implementation supports what it supports.  A user can't realistically expect an implementation to support a function that was added to the registry after the library was released, for example.  The library should document what functions it supports (just like any other functionality), and the user should be expected to read such documentation.  (Strangely, I'm having this same conversation in JSON Schema Land.)

For a function expression to be well typed:

> 1. its function name must be registered (see {{iana-fnex}}),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. its function name must be registered (see {{iana-fnex}}), which provides its declared type and the declared types of its parameters;
```

this would make it clear why that is a requirement.

(Do we want to spend MUST interoperability requirements here?)

Author: @cabo I made a similar change in 5f210fed5a2987e586f197d782cc1c4cf8edd824. Note that the bullets (1), (2), and (3) correspond to the summary points 1, 2, and 3.

Author: Section 2.1 already states:
> A JSONPath implementation MUST raise an error for any query which is not
well formed and valid.

So I don't think we need to use MIST here also.

Reviewer: We don't need to, but we could.  I think it would help.

Author: Ok, see what you make of 3819d94bc7e821cb529003293dee54ec680cd43b.

Reviewer: Thanks, that is what I meant.
